---
layout: post
title: "My first steps ito automating knowledge sharing"
tags: automation
---

I’ve been saying, “I’ve been coding for over ten years.” for more than a decade
now (so yeah, I've been coding for a long time). And I still love it. 

Coding feels like a deeply creative process to me. It’s about long-term
problem-solving and crafting elegant solutions. But it's also about diving into
the nitty-gritty and getting your hands dirty. I take pride in writing clean,
maintainable code, but also in finding a clever hack to glue everything
together.

The one thing that I never found fun are the repetitive tasks. They’re fun the
first time but quickly become tedious after the tenth. I think that's for hat
reason that I’ve always been fascinated by automation. Recently, after attending
the dotAI conference, I saw the incredible potential of AI and automation tools,
which pulled me into yet another rabbit hole.

# Make is the new Zapier

Of course, I've already automated most of my code-oriented tasks, using tools
like [CircleCI](circleci.com) or [Netlify](netlify.com)/[Vercel](vercel.com)/[Cloudflare](https://www.cloudflare.com/) functions. Those
tools are great, but they fall short when the task to automate requires some UI
(like getting data from a website, automatically downloading invoices from your
emails, etc).

For those tasks, I had tried tools like [IFTTT](https://ifttt.com/) and
[Zapier](zapier.com) in the past. I found IFTTT a genius idea the first time
I used it, but its functionality was quite limited. Zapier, while more advanced,
felt similar and quickly became prohibitively expensive. So, I came back once
again to my custom bash and JavaScript scripts.

But then, [Make](make.com) happened. I gave it a try and it has completely
changed how I approach automation. Make combines the best of IFTTT and Zapier
with a much more intuitive UI, powerful debugging tools, and is way cheaper.
It’s incredibly versatile, allowing me to complete projects in an afternoon that
I’d postponed for years. Every day, I experience "wow" moments as I connect this
API and that API to automate stuff I didn't think I could automate. Make feels
like a superpower, I'm feeling that exhilarating feeling of "I can do anything!"
just like the first time I started coding.

# More wow effects

If Make can replace much of my need for scripting, [Airtable](airtable.com) has
given me a similar “wow” effect for data management. Airtable is an incredibly
powerful database with a clean UI that makes it easy to view, edit, and
manipulate data visually. I can create formulas, so one field is derived from
another, link tables together, upload files directly in tables, build visual
custom interfaces to show specific data. Everything is of course accessible
through the API... and through Make; double "wow" effect!

And then you can even plug [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/) in Make, to enrich
data you have in Airtable, and dynamically transform it. Triple "wow" effect.
And since I've started to discover this strange new world of "no-code
automation", I'm discovering more and more of those awesome tools every day.
I keep being amazed at how powerful and accessible they’ve become.

# Posting more here

I started this blog many years ago, when I started to learn web development, and
I used it as a platform to share what I learned. I think it's only fitting if
today, I use what I learn in the realm of no-code automation to post more here,
and post more about what I learn, and use what I learn to post more. 

I know I have ideas worth sharing. My thought process is that if I, after 20
years of experience, am still learning new things, I'm sure others can learn
from them too. This blog is a modest platform, but it’s a way to connect with
you, readers, and contribute to the pool of shared knowledge. Just as my coding
skills allowed me to build and customize this site many years ago, I hope my
growing expertise in automation will help me bring more meaningful content to
it.

Hope to see you soon, once I've posted more!





