---
layout: post
title: "Freelancing, I miss you"
custom_v2_id: 25
tags: xmp, phpsec, php, metadatas, iptc, google-analytics, gmail, exif, coldfusion, caracole
---

Well, it's been one month and a half now that I've put my freelance activites
on hold. I'm in contract with a big company to develop an internal
application.

The purpose of the application is really interesting, the guy I'm working with
is too, but the language I have to use as well as the all-administrative thing
of big companies like that is... well... let's just say I LOVE being a
freelancer PHP developper.

One more month and a half and it will be over. I allready have learn a lot
about metadatas in general and particularly Exif, Iptc and XMP. I've also
learned a little about Coldfusion. Enough to know that I won't work with that
language again, unless I'm forced too.

In the remaining week, I'll also learn EXTJs, and this part seems promising. I
guess leaving jQuery and its easy syntax will be hard at first, but all the
data handling of EXTJs seems really powerful.

Anyway, when that contract will be over, I'll be back to Caracole and I have
so many ideas of features and whole websites that I want to create...

I would like to make the admin panel of Caracole the one thing an
administrator would have to check to see if everything is going well on its
website. I allready have an extended `PHPInfo() `highlighting possible
misconfiguration but I want to push that further by integrating Google
Analytics, checking the Gmail inbox associated as well as integrating the
PHPSec library.

In the future I also plan on creating a photography website for Street Art and
graffitis, with gelocalisation, metadatas saving of the author and place,
possibility to upload photo directly from a mobile phone, etc

The old ideas about my own personal website, a quizz website, or one for
rating driver's ed are still in my mind. Wait and see.