---
layout: post
title: "The multi-tab admin problem"
custom_v2_id: 236
tags: security, tabs, session
---

Today I had to update an important zone file at my registrar. Because it was
quite important, and because I already did an almost identical job a few
months ago, I decided to copy-paste the old work.

So I started by opening the `domain A` zone edit page. ThenÂ  I opened a new
tab, and loaded the `domain B` zone edit page.

I selected the `domain B` content and copied it in the `domain A` page. I had
to update some values, mostly IP addresses, and then validate the page.

Instead of updating the `domain A` zones as I expected, it updated the `domain
B` zones and left the `domain A` unchanged. Can you guess why ?

## Session handling

My guess is that everytime I opened a new page, a Session was tracking my
"current" domain, the one I was editing. So opening a new tab to a new domain
changed my current domain from `domain A` to `domain B`.

Therefore, when I updated the `domain A` zone, the next page was assuming I
was editing the `domain B` page. If I had opened the tabs in reverse order, it
would have worked seamlessly.

## Why doing that ?

I have encountered a similar behavior in my own apps. By using the cakePHP
Security behavior, a special security token is generated for each form. Its
integrity is checked whenever a form is posted, and verify that no field has
been tampered (no mandatory field has been deleted, no new field has been
added).

This is a great security component, but because a special key is stored on the
Session side, it also means that whenever you open several tabs, only the
latest can be correctly checked and all other one will get rejected.

It bugs me at first, because I used to open several tabs whenever I need to
"batch add" a lot of items. In real life, I found that I was almost the only
person to do that... So I finally accepted the multi-tab restriction.

Getting back to my registrar : I guess they did it that way because of
security reasons too, but I found it particularly counter-intuitive in that
case and that could have led to serious damages.
