---
layout: post
title: "Working on Wednesday #3 : The long path to get it done"
custom_v2_id: 291
tags: keepass, vim, linux, mono, ruby-on-rails, ubuntu, wednesday
---

This morning I started reading a lot of online blog post, framework
description and other webdev material online I had in my bookmarks. After
reading them, I saved them on my pinboard account to find them easily later.

Lot of good JS and CSS framework/libraries in there, I hope to be able to test
them soon.

I also check my mailbox and respond to mails from my normal job. I shouldn't.
I'm on a day off, I have to force myself to completly cut out those external
calls.

## Now, let's the work begin

Anyway, I finally finished the vimtutor. I still have a some difficulties to
remember the mapping of the basic hjkl movement keys (I always want use k to
move down instead of j). However, I feel confident enough in it to try writing
my new code in it.

So, I headed to the Rails for Zombies tutorial. I thought it was free but the
"win $5 worth of online teaching" / "next course costs $5" make me doubt it a
little. Well, we'll see.

After registering to it, I wanted to save my login and password to KeePass as
I always do.

Unfortunatly, KeePass on my Ubuntu machine works by using mono, and the
keyboard interaction weren't that good (caret is slightly misplaced, inputs
lags before getting displayed, text selection is weird). So I thought "Hey,
let's see if there is a new version". Big mistake.

It appears that there was indeed a new version, a real one, with `apt-get` and
stuff while mine was some hackish install I manually made a few month ago.

But wait, this means manually adding a ppa directory. No big deal, I trust the
author. What ? Still doesn't work ? Hmm, I see. I need `mono` 2.6, and I only
have 2.4.

What ? 2.4 is the latest available version on Ubuntu 10.10 ? You mean I must
upgrade to 11.04 ? Hmm. Why not. I'll have to do it eventually, so let's go.

So I ran all my updates, to have the most up to date system. Unfortunatly,
`language-pack-gnome-fr` doesn't want to upgrade so the OS upgrade isn't
displayed.

## Wait, what am I doing ?

And that's when I remember that my initial wish was to learn Ruby on Rails and
that I was now on the road to upgrading my whole operating system. That is not
exactly speaking procrastination, but it makes me do so much other things that
my initial goal that I really looks like it.

I finally managed to purge my packets, upgrade to 10.10 and then to 11.04. But
this took me 4 hours, and now it's 11PM and I guess I won't start this rails
tutorial today, after all.