---
layout: post
title: "How I want my music files encoded"
custom_v2_id: 338
tags: encoding, mp3, ogg, flac
---

I have a lot of music files on my computer. Some comes from CDs I encoded,
other comes from the magic of file sharing. Most of them are in `MP3` format,
but I have a few `ogg` and `wma` tracks, mixed with even a bit of `wav` or
`flac` files.

Even the `mp3` files are encoded in a bunch of different settings, with
various bitrates and frequencies. The only thing that is quite consistent in
all that is that my tagging of metadatas.

Other than that it's quite a mess and has my collection grow larger, it starts
to bother me. No two albums, even for the same music duration, are the same
filesize.

I decided to clean a bit this whole mess. Let me explain my goal, and how I
plan on doing that.

First, I want all my files encoded with the same settings, so the music I'm
listening to and its file size is consistent accross different albums.

Second, I want all the files correctly taggued with track number, artist,
album and song name. I don't really care about the year nor the genre. Genre
is highly subjective, and year can be misleading in mixed albums like
soundtracks, are we talking about the year of the release of the cd, or the
year of the release of the individual song?

Third, I want all my files in `ogg` format. First, because I want to get rid
of as many proprietary format as I can, and `mp3` is proprietary. But mainly
because `mp3` is an encoding format bloated with the previous layers of MPEG
layer 2 and MPEG layer 1, resulting in larger file size and more encoding
complexity.

And finally, I want to have the best sound quality that I can afford, without
going to extreme like listening to `FLAC` directly as my ears won't be able to
catch the difference anyway.

So, I'm gonna buy a big hard drive, something around 1To I think, and put on
it all my music files in `FLAC` format, encoded directly from CD. This `FLAC`
files will have all the required metadata saved in them.

Then, I'll create an `ogg` subdir in each of my album dirs where I'll encode
my FLAC in `ogg` with a bitrate of 128kbds (as the human hear won't be able to
really get the difference with anything higher than that), and using the
metadata from the `FLAC` files.

Finally, I'll put the `ogg` files on my portable media player and listen to
them on the go.

I do not need to put the `FLAC` on the PMP, has my ears won't be able to hear
the difference. I only need to put a compressed version. Maybe in a few years,
when PMP hard drive size will have increase I'll be able to increase the
quality of my `ogg` and use better quality files. If I ever need to do that, I
won't have to rip the CDs again as I'll already have the `FLAC` to create the
encoding.

This will be hard work, but I guess it will be worth it in the long run. At
least, now I know a bit more about encoding formats and settings.